---
layout: single
title: 360-in-525 Minutes Course Set in Data Sciences, Spring 2018, Uppsala
permalink: /360-in-525/
author_profile: true
header:
  overlay_color: "#5e616c"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/DISP-research-1600x524.jpg
  caption: 
excerpt: 'Learn data sciences from domain experts and its mathematical foundations while getting your hands dirty with real data.<br /><br /><br />'
---
{% include toc %}

# Overview of a 360-in-525 Minutes Course Set in Data Sciences

**For PhD or MSc Students at Uppsala University, Spring 2018**


There will be several full-day workshop-style courses (360 minutes-long, with the usual three 15-minutes-long breaks before and after the 75-minutes-long lunch break in the 525 minutes from 0815 to 1700 hours CET) worth 1hp to 3hp credits each. 
This is possibly partly supported by the Centre for Interdisciplinary Mathematics jointly with the Department of Mathematics in Spring 2018 and taught by domain experts in Digital Sociology, Geospatial Analytics, Population Genetics and Mathematical Statistics. 

This course set is coordinated by Dr. Raazesh Sainudiin, a researcher in applied mathematics and statistics at the Department of Mathematics, Uppsala University. 
If you are a PhD or MSc student at Uppsala University, please  register for appropriate subsets of the course set by emailing the course set coordinator with subject line '360-in-525'. 

Feel free to take any subset of modules if you can satisfy the prerequisite modules. Physical presence is mandatory for the credits in all of these modules.

# 360-in-525-1: Introduction to Apache Spark for Data Scientists
This is a one-full-day workshop (1 hp) on **April 20 2018** on [Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org/) one of the most widely used open-source software for analysing big data in industry and academia. 

# 360-in-525-2: Social Media and Big Data
This is a two-full-days workshop (2 hp) on **April 26-27 2018**. Prerequisites: 360-in-525-1 or 'Introduction to data Science (the Fall 2017 course)'. The first day will be an introduction to the domain by [Professor Simon Lindgren, a digital sociologist from Umea](http://www.simonlindgren.com/) and the second day will build towards making one's own twitter experimental designs in real-time. 
We will formalise notions like the *Where Am I?* Operator in a given *population ideological tree or forest* of *retweet networks* and try digesting gdelt global news streams, if time permits. 


# 360-in-525-3: Geospatial Analytics on Big Data 
This is a two-full-days workshop (2 hp) on **May 3-4 2018**. Prerequisites: 360-in-525-1  or 'Introduction to data Science'. The first day will be done by domain experts from Uppsala University's [Department of Social and Economic Geography](http://www.kultgeog.uu.se/?languageId=1) in order to introduce the basic problems and datasets of the field with a hands-on lab tutorials in non-distributed geospatial analytics. 
The second day will be on distributed geospatial analytics over real datasets that can be scaled to petabytes (syllabus is jointly designed with experts in London's big data industry).

# 360-in-525-4. Mathematical, Statistical and Computational Foundations for Data Scientists
 
Three-full-day workshops (3 hp) on **May 11, 18 and 25 2018**. Prerequisites: current proficiency in high-school level mathematics (pre-calculus and algebra with some programming experience beyond Excel). Target Audience: any MSc or PhD student at UU who wants to understand the mathematical statistical foundations in the data scientist's computational toolbox. The approach will use formal mathematical communication of concepts statring from sets and logic, but with concomitant development of computer programming skills to algorithmically construct and implement the concepts. Topics will include: Sets, Maps, Functions, Modular Arithmetic, Axiomatic Probability, Conditional probability, Pseudo-random constructive understanding of random variables and structures including graphs, Statistics, Likelihood Principle, Bayes Rule, Decisions (parametric and non-parametric) including tests and estimators, Markov chains and their pseudorandom constructions, etc. We will use [SageMath](http://www.sagemath.org/) locally and collaborate in [COCALC](https://cocalc.com/) during the lab/lectures.

# 360-in-525-5: Population Genetics and Big Data 

Two-full-day workshops (2 hp) on **May 31 and June 1 2018**. Prerequisites: (360-in-525-1  or 'Introduction to data Science') and (360-in-525-4 or equivalent). The first day will be on the basic theories in current population genetics and genomics. The second day will use ADAM and possibly Hail over Apache Spark.

# 360-in-525-0: Mathematical Statistical  Learning Theory Series: An L1 View

Meeting time for this 1-day-workshop is TBA via doodle. 

This course will introduce a PhD student in mathematics or mathematical statistics to one of the fundamental problems at the very core of various probabilistic theories of decision-making.  
We will mainly focus on the relation between the combinatorial geometric complexity of the (sigma) algebras of a simple measurable space and the rates of convergence of empirical measures over them in one of the simplest posable decision problems -- *nonparametric density estimation* of an unkown density f in L1 based on finitely many observations drawn independenty from it, but without making any mathematical compromise whatsoever, and thereby giving the so-called *universal performance guarantee* . 

This course was given in another form at CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France for PhD students in mathematics there. Students in Geometry and Combinatorial probability as well as analysis may find this course insightful for their own research, as one of the basic theorems involves the combined use of several unique inequalities in a specific partial order of implications.

The emphasis will involve constructive mathematics and perhaps delve into tree arithmetics towards such decision with universal performance guarantees along with their combinatorial, algebraic and analytic properties if time permits. Unfortunately such guarantees are not available for big data sets and are sorely needed for being able to impose legal requirements and standards on automated decision-making systems.

# LOGISTICS
Please block the dates if you are considering taking them and pass it to other mates of yours who may want to do some subset of these modules. There is no TA support or fika planned during the breaks, so bring enough water, cookies, tea, etc during the three 15 minute breaks before and after lunch. For all courses except 360-in-525-0, you are expected to bring a laptop that is not older than 3 years (in general) with wireless access (details on the needed disk space and RAM will partly depend on which modules are being taken.  
Effort is underway to make the hardware requirements on the laptop minimal -- any typical Mac, Linux or Windows laptops you use for your research is expected to suffice).

# Industrial sponsors for fika are being sought

We are currently seeking Swedish industrial sponsors to keep our brains hydrated, caffeinated, and sugary! 

Swedish industries that want to optimise their operations based on data at their disposal, especially in geospatial analytics, security, recommender systems, health care, and other area can help with the preparation of their potential employees. 

We expect over a dozen keen students on each workshop day, except the mathematical course, and may need at least 1000 sek for each of the two fikas on each day out of the 11 days in total (sponsorships can be as low as 1000 sek and in return we will spend time trying to formally relate the appropriate parts of the lecture, at the right mathematical juncture, to problems in your industry with an emphasis on your industry's pressing needs and skill-sets - this gives great advertisement for your company and can inspire students to continue with research internships at your company in the near future). 
